Before we get started, I think its important we clarify one thing: Yes, there are SUPER spammy bots on Instagram that cause very unpleasant user experiences for all of us.
Instead of empowering people to create more spammy bots, this article aims to demystify how Instagram interaction automation works so more small business owners have the knowledge and tools to grow their business through the platform, like I have, and do it in a way that wont negatively affect other users or their accounts, given Instagrams latest crackdown on inauthentic activity.
In other words, this article will not teach you how to automate a bot that comments or follows other peoples accounts. Thats the sort of activity that people perceive as spammy and, ultimately, it isnt an effective way to grow your Instagram business either.
From my personal experience growing Instagram accounts like @pinlord, @potteryforall, @macramemakers, and many others, its possible to automate certain interactions on that will help grow an account at an above-average rate without generating a bad user-experience for other people on the app. Its how @potteryforall has gained over 100,000 followers in 12 months.
Its doesnt require being a hacker, its just about understanding how interaction automation functions and putting in the work required to consistently execute the right strategy over a long period of time.
Heres how you do it:
What a bot does is interact with other peoples Instagram accounts so you dont have to do it manually. Heres a video that explains it simply:
If programmed correctly on an Instagram account with differentiated awesome content, a bot is like rocket-fuel! It will multiply your rate of growth because itll allow your already-great account to be discovered many more people that you could have never reached if you were doing all of the interactions manually.
On the other hand, an incorrectly programmed bot on an account that doesnt have delightful content will likely ensure that your Instagram appears spammy because many more people will receive an irrelevant interaction from an account they dislike (yours). Its a terrible first impression, and worse of all, itll be a big waste of your time, energy and money because it simply wont generate any substantial growth.
So, before you start your bot endeavors its important that you make sure your Instagram is a well-designed rocket, ready for some bot rocket fuel. The absolute essentials for one are:
How your account looks at first glance is often the only way people decide whether or not to follow you once they discover your account after receiving a like from your bot.
The better you are at executing top-notch visual content that gives people real value, the more effective your bot will be at converting interactions into Follows and the faster youll grow because your account will be more visually-differentiated to all of the other accounts creating similar content or selling similar products to yours.
A simple way to execute that is by having a well-executed and differentiated visual grid (like the accounts in the photo below) and creating thoughtful content that gives people value (you can learn more about how to do that by reading this article about how to optimize your content to increase your Instagram engagement rate as well as this one about why your Instagram account isnt growing).
To automate an effective bot youll also need to know the hashtags and accounts that your target audience pays attention to the most.
Who are the people on Instagram that will find your account valuable? Which accounts do they love to follow? Which hashtags do they check most often?
The more clearly you know what type of person will find your content valuable and the more accurately youre able to identify the accounts and hashtags (heres a great article on how to find the most effective hashtags for you) they pay attention to the most, the better Targets youll automate your bot with and the more effective your bot will be at converting interactions into Follows because each interaction is more likely to be relevant (well delve into what bot Targets are later so dont worry if you dont know what that means right now).
Once youve spent time ensuring that your Instagram account has a visually differentiated grid and you have identified the accounts and hashtags your target audience cares about the most, its time to find the best bot for you.
There are many (and I mean MANY) websites out there claiming to provide the most effective bot services for your Instagram account. Ive tried most of them and so should you, but currently, here are the most effective (and safest) ones Ive used in the following categories:
(Btw, I change this portion of the article frequently because Instagram changes all the time and this influences which services are the most effective. Currently, Instagram has implemented new changes that most automation providers have not been able to adapt to. This means that most bot providers might malfunction or simply not provide results. If your current bot provider isnt working for you, make sure to check back here for updates on the latest automation software Im trying. Also, if you try a bot provider and it doesnt work, Id recommend that you continue trying new oned until you find one that works for you. Different bot providers will work for different accounts. The last update was November 2nd, 2019)
The Most Reliable & Effective: When it comes to the Instagram automation software industry, its important to know that there are new automation services popping up all of the time and most of them usually have crappy or non-existent customer service and most of them tend to go out of business quickly because they cant adapt to Instagrams changes. Starting at $15, Instamber is currently the most reliable because theyve made the biggest strides in adapting to the latest Instagram algorithm changes so their service actually works. This tends to keep your account safer than other services that havent adapted and their interaction services are more likely to be stopped by Instagram (this means your account is also more likely to be flagged by Instagram). They also offer a new feature in which you can automate the process of viewing stories, which greatly increases your reach and results as well as features that enable you to schedule and automate posts and respond to DMs, which will help you not have to use your app as much and this will keep your account safe.
If Instamber doesnt work for you, Id recommend trying Instazood or Boostgram. They are one of the longest-running companies in the industry and they have a proven track record of delivering great customer service, so even if they dont have the most effective automation, at least they have customer service that will make an effort to solve your problems.
Ive also included a guide to how to automate a non-spammy bot through Instamber at the bottom of this article.
The Cheapest & Most Versatile: Starting at $6 p/month Instagrambotfollower.com is by far the most versatile and robust Instagram tool out of all of the other services listed in this article, especially at this price. They offer simple and effective interaction automation like everyone else, but on top of that, they have a bunch of other features like post scheduling and DM automation which can be useful if you want to use it as your all-in-one service to manage your Instagram activities. Another element that I think really sets them apart is that they have a clean and easy to use interface, which can be helpful if youre automating a bot for the first time. The only downside Ive found with them is that they dont offer an easy to access customer service, but thats to expect at this price-rang.
If you dont like not having customer service, try Insta Captain. They the same UX but better functionality when it comes to targeting as well as customer service but also a higher price.
What To Do When Youve Tried Everything, Have a Budget, but Cant Grow Your Account: Starting at $750 per month, Social Sensei is the most expensive option in this article but they manage everything for you by hand, with a dedicated account manager. Basically, what a fancy agency does, but cheaper and likely more effective in terms of growth. Apart from automation, they do your content strategy, account management, hashtag research, automated posting, and most other account growth needs. Its like hiring an in-house social media manager, but its manager remotely. If youve tried all growth tactics, have a budget, need to grow your Instagram but cant figure out how to do itthey are a good first option to try before hiring someone.
Feel free to try them all, but in an effort to give you as much actionable information as possible in this article, Ill be showing you the specific strategies and parameters I use on my Instamber account at the bottom of this article.
But before we start, its important that I make one thing clear
A comment on Instagram is a positive interaction only when its relevant to the content of the photo.
Given that a bot will interact with hundreds of photos each day, its impossible to program a bot that will create context-relevant comments for all of the photos and contexts itll come across. Instead of avoiding comment automation, pushy social media marketers ignore the fact that they are creating unpleasant interactions and program bots to comment generic and vague phrases like great shot or Keep up the great work! to try and get someones attention. This type of automation is what creates the spammy bots you and I despise on Instagram.
In the same vein, a follow on Instagram is a positive interaction only when its perceived as a sincere and organic by the person youre following.
Given that a bot will interact with hundreds of accounts each day, its impossible to program a bot that will mostly follow people who will clearly perceive it as a sincere and organic follow. Equally as annoying as comment automation, pushy social media marketers program bots to follow hundreds of account that they dont personally know in order to get peoples attention. This is also the type of automation is what creates the spammy bots you and I despise on Instagram.
Dont be a pushy social media marketer and dont automate comments or follows. Apart from it creating ill-will with most people youll interact with, itll likely get you flagged and downgraded by the Instagram algorithm, or even shadowbanned given Instagram their latest efforts to reduce these inauthentic activities.
The way to automate an effective Instagram bot that isnt spammy is by only sticking to like automation. Why? In comparison to comments or follows, likes are a subtle nudge that only shows up on peoples activity feed. Most of us dont tend to have ill-will against a like from a person we dont know, and in fact, were usually pretty happy or at least indifferent to an extra like in one of our posts (Instagram is also highly incentivized to be more lenient with like automation since it increases engagement rates on the app and all they want is for people to use the app more)! And unless youre someone who has thousands of followers, most of us still check our activity feed to see who liked our posts and discover new Instagram account this way.
Effectively automating likes through a bot is the same as paying Instagram to have your account shown on peoples home feeds through a sponsored ad. Its an activity that creates hundreds of opportunities for your Instagram username to be discovered by people who didnt know you existed.
The goal here is to program a bot that, through liking, creates as many discovery opportunities as possible with people who are likely to tap through your username and perceive enough value in your account to give it a Follow.
The better you are at programming your bot to find those people, the faster your account will grow.
Alright, now that you know the principles of automating a bot, heres how you implement them
For illustration purposes, Ill show you how I automate a non-spammy bot for my account @macramemakers on Instamber.
Alright, so once youve set up your account, heres what you do:
Instagram prevents some accounts from making actions (likes, follows) because when you use a service like this one, they are created using an IP address and location different than yours. To resolve this Instamber, allows you to activate a dedicated proxy from them. It costs $.75, but if you dont want to pay that, you can always set up your own (which is way more complicated if you dont know how to do that).
Once thats activated and youre in the dashboard, go to your Promotion section, select Settings, and under the Actions tab, only leave the Viewing stories + likes box checked, set your Minimum liked to 1 and your Max likes to 3, and hit SAVE. This means that your account will randomly like between 1 and 3 of other peoples posts and view their stories. By doing this, that person will see your username up to 4 times (3 in their activity feed and 1 in their who viewed your stories screen) in a way that appears organic to them, which greatly increases the likelihood of them viewing your account.
In the filters tab, select that gender, language, and age guidelines that best fit your target audience and then do the following:
Click on the + New Promotion button and add the target Instagram accounts whos followers your bot will interact with and the locations and the hashtags whos taggers youll interact with (for some accounts, locations will be irrelevant).
Here is where having a clear and specific target audience becomes important.
Which are the Instagram accounts that have the highest density of your target audience? Which are the hashtags and locations that are tagged by the highest density of your target audience? Those are the accounts, hashtags and locations that should be your targets. The better you are at identifying the right targets, the more effective your bot will be.
Ill use my own Instagram @macramemakers as an example.
My target audience is Female macrame makers and enthusiasts from the age of 2540 in the USA.
From my research, the Instagram accounts that have the highest density of followers that fit those characteristics are @modernmacrame, @emily_katz, @niromastudio, @macramania, @the_forestfern. The hashtags that have the highest density are #macramewallhanging #macrameplanthanger #macramedecor #macramemaker #macrameartist. And locations dont apply to me. These are my targets.
Once youve entered them all, click on Add Promotion.
Once youve set your guidelines and included your targets, youll be all set. All thats left to do is Start your promotion and your account will begin interacting with other accounts so they can discover you.
Its also going to be super important for you to constantly check your Statistics (its the button next to Settings). There, youll see how your bot is performing and converting. If after a couple of weeks youre not seeing good results in your stats page, it might be because you havent chosen the right targets to direct interactions to so try changing them. Your stats page is where youll measure how good of a job youre doing so its going to be essential.
And last but not least, make sure you follow all of Instambers best practices to get the best results and avoid being flagged by Instagram. Automation is no longer as simple as it used to be, so if you dont want to get flagged, follow the requirements that these services give you and dont cut corners. They are the experts on what is required!
The Instagram anti automation measures are getting stronger by the day and soon you might not be able to automate at all. Because of this, this Hot Clients option is the only practical solution if traditional automation doesnt work. Via this method, users can target the a targets audiences posts manually and interact with them. Instamber collects users target posts by its filters so that the users can see them choose them and interact with them. They dedicated some feature like comments, sending direct messages and likes and you can apply some actions on the collected posts. Although youll need to spend some manual time on this feature, itll be more effective than doing it by hand on Instagam and likely getting blocked by doing that also.
And thats it! Thats how you automate a non-spammy bot on Instamber.
If you find yourself struggling at first, dont worry, it takes all of us a while to get the hang of this! If from reason or another your automator isnt working, contact the bot services help team (or try another of the bot providers I recommended in this article). In general, they are usually very helpful, reliable and will be able to tell you what you need to resolve your issue.
And dont forget! Instagram is continually changing and each account is unique, but the principles of automation will remain the same for any service. Whats important is that you always keep in mind that the keys to success are:
We have more than enough spammy bots on Instagram
PS  this article, like all other articles about this topic that youll find on google, contains affiliate links to the services I recommend. That being said, I have personally evaluated all of the companies I include in my article as well as constantly revisit them and change my recommendations accordingly. In the industry of Instagram automation, the effectiveness of these companies changes depending on their ability to adapt to Instagrams changes. Because Instagram changes all the time, which companies are effective and which are not, change all the time. That is why I constantly edit my article as well as clarify the dates of the latest edits so you can keep checking on my latest recommendations.

