It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent, but the one most adaptable to change.  Darwin
I started my own company when I was 31. By all accounts, I was a highly energetic, successful, and driven individual.
I had a five year plan. I had my monthly goals. I had contingency plans. You know what I didnt plan for? I didnt plan for my active and healthy 35-year-old-body to be rushed to the hospital with stroke-like symptoms. Weird, I know.
As it happens, I was diagnosed with a chronic illness that has left me in a wheelchair and bed-bound for a significant chunk of the past two years. And thats when adaptability forced its way into my life.
From this experience, Ive learned that the single most valuable trait for a business leader is adaptability. Not confidence. Not focus. Not optimism. (Although these all come in handy, to be sure!) But adaptability. Thats how you weather the storm(s) and come out ahead.
Now, you get to do a lot of soul searching when youre trapped inside your head. The saying, The only certainty is uncertainty, really resonated with me. It dawned upon me that I was never really in control, despite all my planning. Sometimes, you get derailed and theres nothing you can do about it.
What saved my business was my ability to adapt.  Stephanie Lee
All the contingency planning in the world couldnt have saved my business. Optimism didnt keep my business going. My confidence was, er, waning (to say the least) and I couldnt count on that either. What saved my business was my ability to adapt.
I learned how to dictate emails because my arms werent working, had to think about how to walk because my muscles couldnt remember I had to rethink how to do the simplest tasks. Unbeknownst to a very frustrated me, being forced to do things differently because of my disease  to think differently  was a gift in disguise. It turned out to be awesome for business.
My disease resulted in new physical and mental limitations that forced me to learn new ways of doing old tasks. Having to stop and think about the many ingrained actions I previously performed without thinking made me realize how habitual my mindset was. I wasnt really thinking about why I did things, I did them out of habit.
After struggling with and relearning simple physical tasks during my day to day, I realized I could use my newfound adaptability to rethink how my company was run. The result of this shake up was a 68% increase in traffic to the site, revenue growth in the double-digits, and restructuring the workload.
Scientists call the ability for your brain to learn new things, neuroplasticity. Just like exercising develops a muscle, using your brain in new ways causes it to grow. The brains grey matter  the cells where processing takes place  increases in the area of the brain thats learning a new task 1.
Technology now evolves at a breakneck speed. While you once could have an edge by focusing on being great at [insert single talent], its no longer an advantage to be really good at doing one particular thing . . . more importantly, you need to be really good at learning how to do new things. Not only does this cultivate adaptability  which keeps your brain warmed up for unexpected changes  youre also growing your brain, therefore training yourself to generate more creative solutions.
Rewiring your brain doesnt just happen by partaking in the mental challenge of a Luminosity game, but through sustained cognitive tasks 2. Making a skill permanent requires the slow steady work of forming new neural pathways. That is, making new thought processes a habit.
So, how can you consciously develop your neuroplasticity/ adaptability to advance your career?
I didnt expect my daily life to be derailed by chronic health issues, and I certainly didnt it expect that it would result in a newfound adaptability I could apply to to my business to help it grow!
The good news for you, is that you dont need a disease to help yourself see beyond the bandwidth of your own expectations  you can cultivate a sense of adaptability through a few easy steps and exercises. Small changes can lead to big progress! And why not give it a try?! Even Darwin is on your side :)
//
Thanks for reading. If you enjoyed this article, feel free to hit that clap button a few times ( ) to help others find it :)
For in-depth content on starting and growing your travel agency, visit Host Agency Reviews blog . And the reviews part, you ask? Think of us as the Yelp for travel agents looking for hosts, franchises, and consortium to partner with.
//
Originally published at hostagencyreviews.com on July 8, 2016.

