CHICAGO  December 1, 2015Basecamp is now a $100 billion dollar company, according to a group of investors who have agreed to purchase 0.000000001% of the company in exchange for $1.
Founder Jason Fried informed his employees about the new deal at a recent company-wide meeting. The financing round was led by Yardstick Capital and Institutionalized Venture Partners.
In order to increase the value of the company, Basecamp has decided to stop generating revenue. When it comes to valuation, making money is a real obstacle. Our profitability has been a real drag on our valuation, said Mr. Fried. Once you have profits, its impossible to just make stuff up. Thats why were switching to a freeconomics model. Well give away everything for free and let the market speculate about how much money we could make if we wanted to make money. That way, the skys the limit!
A $100 billion value for Basecamp is not outlandish, says Aanandamayee Bhatnagar, a finance professor and valuation guru at Grenada States Schnook School of Business. Bhatnagar points to a leaked, confidential corporate strategy plan that projects Basecamp will attract twelve billion users by the end of 2016.
How will the company overcome the fact that there are only 7.3 billion people alive today? Why limit users to people? said Bhatnagar.
In order to determine the valuation of companies, Bhatnagar typically applies the following formula: [(Twitter followers x Facebook fans) + (# of employees x 1000)] x (total likes + daily page views) + (monthly burn rate x Googles stock price)-squared and then doubles if it theyre mobile first or if the CEO has run a business into the ground before. Bhatnagar admits the math is mostly a guess but points out that the press eats it up.
To help handle the burdens of an increased valuation, Basecamp hired former YouTube exec Craig Mirage as Chief Valuation Officer earlier this month. Mirage hopes to replicate YouTubes valuation success at Basecamp. Of course, the investment comes with great expectations. But you should see the spreadsheet models were making up. Really breakthrough stuff, said Mirage.
Basecamp will lead the new global movement filled with imaginary assumptions on growth and monetization potential, he continued. Were excited to roll out a list of unconfirmed revenue possibilities that involve crowdsourcing, claymation emoticons, 4D touch, in-app garage sales, goofy looking goggles, social stuff, and an app store. Also, everything we make will include a compass.

