Last year saw a huge surge in startups. In the UK alone half a million new companies were started. With only 25% of all startups continuing business a year after theyve launched, the question on every budding entrepreneurs lips is:
Whats the secret to building a successful company?
Well, we believe we have the answer.
Zappos have done it.
Southwest Airlines have done it.
And now more and more startups are following suit.
Yes, you heard that right.
Theres a new breed of entrepreneur choosing happiness before profits. But whats remarkable is how, in making this choice, these companies are becoming highly profitable.
By placing the happiness of their employees and customers first, theyve created incredibly strong cultures and an even happier balance sheet.
So if youre one of those people setting out into the world of entrepreneurship, then its worth spending some time defining what will make you happy as this will give your startup a more solid foundation to build upon.
We spend most of our waking lives at work.
Its a big part of who we are, so its important that however were earning a living, were enjoying what we do.
By finding and following what excites you, youll help to give your life real meaning and your business its mojo. The path to a profitable business starts with recognising where your passion lies.
And dont just think what do I enjoy?, but rather which problems do I see that need addressing that get me excited?.
Its vital to your startups progression that youre passionate about the problem youre trying to solve.
After all youll probably be devoting several years of your life and some long hours, so its vital that youre into what youre doing.
If youre not, it will show  in your ability to motivate yourself and others, the quality of your service or product and the relationships you build with your customers.
Take a second and think about how you work when youre not happy, when youre feeling negative, anxious or stressed.
Are you creative? Inspired? Motivated? Engaged? Is our productivity at its peak?
Our ability to work at our most effective reduces when were feeling stressed or under pressure. We cant make decisions thoughtfully or work to our full potential.
Now turn it around. When you feel happy, how do you work? Are you charged up, feeling creative and positive about outcomes? More resilient and persistent when we suffer setbacks?
Our brains become more alert, open to ideas and innovation when were happy, letting us to work to our full potential. Its a recipe for productivity that comes much easier to those whose business idea revolves around something they believe in.
If employees are treated right, they treat the outside world right, the outside world uses the companys product again, and that makes the shareholders happy.
Herb Kelleher, Southwest Airlines
Study after study proves that happy teams are more creative, productive and effective. Just think about it for a second.
As well as a variety of diverse businesses were seeing a movement of individuals that want to start businesses firstly as a lifestyle choice, and secondly to make money.
These startup founders are choosing to do things differently for various reasons that may include:
Start with the following 3-step process to make happiness your business model:
Before you start on your entrepreneurial journey, its vital that you consider what youre in this for.
Whatever success looks like, its probably not where you are now.
Really spend time thinking about what your end goal is. Try to focus on the life you want and the impact you want to make on peoples lives, not the numbers you need (that will come).
Have fun, do good and the money will come.
Richard Branson
We believe you can lay the foundations for success by really defining who you are and what you stand for  your values, passion and purpose. At The Happy Startup School, we believe passion trumps any kind of entrepreneurial experience. Defining your passion is what will drive you to succeed  after all if youre not passionate about your business why should anyone else be?
This passion will help you define your business purpose and help people rally around your cause.
Rather than saving the real you for the margins of life, youll be living a seven day weekend!
It will create a contagiously happy environment for the people around you, with a positive effect on both productivity and profits.
Having a clear purpose will help people to know why you exist, giving your brand more resilience and your company a reason for being. It will also help you make quicker decisions.
Boldly go where no one has gone before. There are hundreds of challenges yet to solve and you have the exciting opportunity to create a business around your purpose.
Its just a matter of testing different ideas and creating some engineering some serendipity.
By exploring different business models from your mission, we firmly believe youll make your own luck and be on the path to aligning your work to your values.
Happy startups means a happier world  something we all believe in.
At The Happy Startup School were helping a new breed of entrepreneur to realise their dreams. We run experiences and programs that set people on a happier path, with the support of inspiring teachers, mentors and peers.

