A little story about my experience designing various line icons in Illustrator.
Get them here
I started designing icons about 18 months ago now. Im not going to bore you with rules and regulations, just share with you my important snippets of what I have learned and my journey along the way.
When I began designing line icons, I looked at others for inspiration; Justas Galaburda, Matt Yow, Rocky Roark, Adam Whitcroft and Ryan Putnam to name a few. Their work is pretty impressive.
I was working for a gas boiler company at the time as a Graphic Designer/Illustrator/Whatever they needed me to do design wise. I was designing a promotional brochure to go out to potential customers. On one of the pages I came up with the idea of displaying key points with Illustrated Icons. Here is EVLB Icons; my first proper attempt at some line icons:
I started to realise like many other designers will; less is more. I realised that despite, the nice detail, I felt there was almost too much detail, the lines were too busy. Yes the icons turned out okay in print, but I still thought they could have been a lot better, a lot more consistent and usable across various surfaces rather than just one.
My 2nd major attempt came whilst working at Roy & Co (my current employer). I was asked to create some unique, bold brand icons for an up and coming ReMortgaging company based in South Yorkshire. I took into account my previous attempt, and kept thinking less is more, clean and crisp is the way forward. Here is my initial outcome
The overall outcome for the line icons was very aesthetically pleasing as well as fun to create and apply. They had their own unique style, a style I believe had rarely been done before; a continuous line icon. This was something I referred back to in future projects.
I was asked by a large UK Ticket selling company to create a few icons for different sectors of an upcoming website design overhaul in the pipelines. At first it was an initial 8, but what do you know, things got a little crazy and I ended up making a full set of icons for the clients project.
However, this was a tricky one, these icons needed to work at a smaller scale as well as a bigger scale. They needed to be clean, crisp and modern yet still stand out on a smaller scale as much as they would on a larger scale. I created myself a little, simple test.The 30px test.
The 30px test is quite simple; Do they work inside a border of 30px x 30px. I found this an effective way to make sure they worked on a smaller scale. I would design the icon for each sector (festival, tickets, DJs etc.) then outline the icon and drop it into a 30px x 30px box. This helped me a of a lot, some icons worked and some didnt, a lesson many designers will learn or already know.
Brand icons are self explanatory, icons created for the brand in topic. I was asked by Roy at Roy & Co to create 4 x Brand Icons for Roy & Co. These icons would be used mainly on the new website at a medium to large scale and on promotional material. I had to hit these on the head.
Id took what Id learnt so far and wanted to implement it into the Roy & Co icons project. What Id learnt so far was: Less is more, be more consistent, stick to 1 or 2 weight strokes and create clean, crisp and modern icons. This was a plan of action...or so I thought
I decided that the icons I was creating were just not powerful enough, they needed more detail, but not too much that they looked overbearing and complicated. They needed to make the identity of Roy & Co stand out even more but at the same time not punch you in the face with awkwardness. I decided I had to break one of my rulesI had to add more detail. So, after much thought, deliberation and design, here was the final outcome
Rasterisation is BAD when placing an icon into a Photoshop document. So make sure you save it as an SVG from Illustrator or at the very least make sure it is a Vector Smart Object in Photoshop, this will help keep the quality of the icon looking nice and crisp online.
Ive learnt a lot over the past 18 months about icon design. Ive learnt to keep a line icon clean and crisp and dont over think things too much. Ive learnt to go with the flow and see where it takes you and that hard work really does pay off.
There arent any such rules, just go with your own unique twist, learn along the way and most of all always improve your skills as a Graphic Design or Illustrator.
In March of this year (2015) I decided to create a icon set purposely for use on a smaller scale. Minimalistic icons that would work on a small scale and would be very user friendly and easy to understand.
http://sliceui.com/minimalistic-icons/
In June of this year (2015) I was handed the task of designing a website for a Server company based in Australia, this of course came with the challenge of designing some fresh new icons. I explored different weights and gradients
Or check out my work on Dribbble

