This post originally ran on TechCrunch.
Startups.We know the mantra: Team matters. Is this philosophy exaggerated? Overrated? Clich? No. Team is the only thing that matters.
Whatever youre working on now, the half-life of innovation is so rapid now that your product will soon be out-of-date. Your existence is irrelevant unless you continue rapid innovation. Your ability to keep up is dependent on having a great team of differing skills. Individuals dont build great companies, teams do.
The nature of the Internet and global knowledge is such that even if youve stumbled on to a super interesting area of innovation there will be many teams tackling the same problem at exactly the same time. If you develop something novel that catches a spark youll have the world gunning for you over night. In this globally connected world product leads disappear in nano-seconds.
The company with the best team on the field will win. This will be the team who hires the most talented people, channels them in the most productive configuration and gets the most output from their unique capabilities.
So how exactly do you assemble such a team?
1. Only hire A players
Theres an old saying, A players beget A players. B players beget C players. Why? Well, A players are discerning and tend to only want to join somewhere where they perceive other A players are. B players tend to have slightly more self-confidence issues so they tend to hire people slightly worse than themselves  thus C teams.
Is this a universal truism? Of course not. But it is general pattern matching. And its why VCs tend to look for uber-talented founding teams. We know that if you start with ho-hum founders youre less likely to assemble a world-class team.
So if youre trying to scale your team be focused on quality. Dont sacrifice. Dont hire too quickly just because you raised money or because you feel pressure to make things happen. The minute you compromise on quality youve already begun the descent.
Aim high.
2. Find people to punch above their weight class
I wrote an entire blog post about this in the past highlighting my belief that you should hire people who punch above their weight class. But what does that actually mean?
It means that many management teams I know feel the need to hire people who have done it before and frankly many VCs encourage this. Its a mistake. When you hire somebody too early who has already done it you often find somebody that is less motivated in tough times, less willing to be scrappy (as many startups need to be), more needy and less mentally flexible / willing to change their way of thinking.
Importantly, you also find people who are too quick to undermine the authority of the founders. They know more. You dont want sycophants  dont get me wrong  you want people who challenge your thinking and a meritocracy of ideas. But you dont want team members who openly question your judgment, your authority. At least not publicly.
So what do it mean to punch above ones weight class? Its a boxing analogy. It means a welter weight who wants to fight in the heavy-weight category. It means a young Turk who has something to prove. It means somebody who held the director of sales in their last company but in this company wants to be VP. Their last company said, you dont have enough years of experience.
You said, Eff experience. I want to know whether you can deliver. If you can, youre golden. Youll go a long way. If you cant  youre toast. Are you up for it? Its Tristan Walker of FourSquare. They hired him when he was an MBA. He had no right asking for a senior biz dev role at one of the hottest companies in the US. But he was ready to punch above his weight class. And he pushed for it.
And heavy-weight he has become. He is out innovating people with 10 years his experience. He is hungry. He is an A player. His innovation and execution are proving his worth.
3. ABR: Always be recruiting
In the entire time I was an entrepreneur I think I never really stopped recruiting.
In my busiest days I was still taking early-morning coffees or end-of-day beers to meet as many people as I could. Sunday mornings often became recruiting coffee sessions.
One of the tells for me of a management team that will not be extra-ordinarily successful is that theyre not always recruiting. Ive seen it before  I send a talented member to a team and they say to me, we dont really have a role for that person.
Really? I always have a role for talented people. I may not have a BUDGET for talented peole  but I always have a role for them. What role? Who the F knows. But let me at least have a coffee and feel out their enthusiasm, talent and ambitions.
I might choose to do an upgrade on my existing team. I might be grooming them for when I have more money or more revenue. I might not be able to persuade them now but I want them to know my company so that when Im ready to step on the gas I have a list of A players I want.
Sure, the challenges to me are obvious:
 How can I afford them?
 How do I motivate them?
 If I bring them on board now, how do I not reduce the motivation from those that I have already hired?
 Should I upgrade existing staff or hire them laterally?
 Can I persuade them to join when they have other choices?
If youre not dedicating a large chunk of time to continually recruiting then youre high. Or maybe youre low  as in not likely to succeed.
Remember. Always be recruiting. ABR.
4. Dont worry about exact roles
I think the most limiting factor that stops startups from recruiting is the we dont have an open spec or we already have somebody doing that role excuse. Dont let that be you. Your team can always make room for David Beckham. Lebron James. Keith Rabois. Sheryl Sandberg.
Get out there and find them. Ask others for intros to their talented friends. Meet talented people and sell them the vision. Get them exited about what youre doing. Be relentless.
If theyre amazing, then be radical. Give them controls that they dont have in their current company. Allocate them enough options to salivate. Convince them that even if they stay only a year theyd learn great stuff that would be valid for the rest of their future. You might need several meetings to bag top prospects. But if you never start youll certainly never hire them.
5. Attitude over Aptitude
If youre doing a great job at continually recruiting and if you have a company ready to hire several people, at some point when you have enough of a pipeline of talented people you need a way to separate them. I have a long-standing mantra, attitude over aptitude. This is assuming a raw minimum of MIPS in the candidate. They need to be seriously smart / talented in their field to make the minimum grade.
But within this minimum acceptable talent level you still have a wide variance of employee types. Lets be honest  some uber talented people are PITAs. I never hire them. One bad apple spoils things for everybody.
You dont see it coming. You figure, sure, theyre a pain but they produce such high quality work Im willing to put up with them. Dont. The last thing you need is some rat bastard fomenting trouble.
Theyre the ones who are talking pop at cocktail parties when theyve had one too many. Theyre having private lunches with other employees talking about how theyve lost faith in your vision.
When you hit internal moments of doubt you need the team members who say, Guys, we can do this! Were up against the ropes but were not down. Lets dig in. You need team members who do that when youre NOT there. You need  mafia.
If you have a trade-off between somebody who is more talented but a bad seed versus somebody who is very talented (but perhaps less so) who is a motivator  Id hire the latter any day of the week.
Choose attitude over aptitude.
6. Culture matters
Along the same lines as aptitude I would say that company culture matters. Know what your principles are. Know the kind of people you want. Know what makes a member of your team. What traits are important to you? What values to you want to embody?
Try to set out guidelines for hiring. Try to live them yourself or people will see through it. As times get tough youll value this culture. Even in uber successful times where youre hiring like mad youll want to know what somebody who embodies your culture is like.
The best book I ever read on this topic was Delivering Happiness by Tony Hsieh (founder of Zappos). Its a must read and has great advice on building a company culture.
7. Dont over-sell
Finally, I always tell management teams not to over sell and I never do so myself.
I dont mean you shouldnt sell hard on the virtues of your company and why youre the next Google  you should. If for nothing else you want all of the talented people you interview to spread the gospel whether they join or not.
What Im talking about is this  if somebody is thinking about joining but you can tell theyre not convinced dont cross the line to get them to join. What does this mean?
It means dont tell them that theyre stake will make them $20 million if youre not convinced it will. Dont promise them that their role will be much bigger than youre planning. Dont promise revenue or growth faster than you know you can achieve.
Sell hard, sure. But dont over sell.
Why? Because if somebody is not convinced in their own mind and you arm-twist them to join theyre bound to be unhappy and eventually leave. Ive seen it a loads of times. You promise the world. You dont deliver. They are frustrated. They feel duped. They express this to others. Now you have more than one problem.
And its never a good thing when a high-profile hire quits unexpectedly. It causes otherwise happy people to second-guess things.
So sell, by all means. But dont over sell. Dont promise unrealistic things. Dont over promise.
So thats it.
So go and schedule your next coffee meetings. Increase your number of interviews. ABR.

